2025-04-18-cache-attack-mitigation-testing.md: add (#649)
3mdeb/news-and-ideas: blog/content/post/2025-04-18-cache-attack-mitigation-testing.md

---
title: 'Cache timing attacks: testing whether your system is susceptible'
abstract: 'Post will explain basic workings of cache and cache timing attacks.
           We will also explore possible ways how to test whether system we are
           using is susceptible to more common cache timing attacks.'
cover: /covers/cache.png
author: michal.iwanicki
layout: post
published: true
date: 2025-04-18
archives: "2025"

tags:
  - cache
  - cache-coloring
  - side-channel
  - timing attack
categories:
  - Security

---

## Introduction

This blog post is based on my experience while implementing tests to verify the

> CROSSCON hypervisor’s mitigation to inter-VM cache timing attacks.

Author: 5f3bb920f94dba28758cfa9b7b508a267d3c0feb

To understand how cache attacks work we need to understand, at least somewhat,
how data is stored and addressed in cache.

The cache stores data in blocks/lines, size of which depends on underlying
architecture, but I only encountered 64-byte blocks (on Intel i7-14700k,
i5-1240P and Cortex-A72). Memory address is divided into 3 parts, each one has
different use when addressing cache:

* Tag - identifies which memory address is stored in cache line
* Index - points to cache set (will be explained a little later)
* Offset - indicated the offset within cache line

Cache architectures can be divided into 3 types:

* Direct-mapped (one-way set-associative) – a direct-mapped cache is the
  simplest implementation. Each memory block can be located in only one place
  (set), so it's enough to check one tag to determine whether it's in the cache
  or not.
* n-way set-associative – each set contains n ways. We need to search through
  all n ways in a set to determine whether the address is in the cache (by
  comparing tags).
* Fully associative – all addresses map to a single set. This requires searching
  through all cache lines to check whether the address (tag) is in the cache or
  not.

> The figure below[^computer-organization-and-design] shows a couple of possible

Reviewer: I like this way of referencing in markdown, maybe we should use it more widely, but in the case of our website, it jumps in a way that makes it misleading. Any ideas how to fix that?

Author: > it jumps in a way that makes it misleading

What do you mean? It jumps to references (from where I took e.g. this figure) not to image directly.
Or maybe you meant that header hides exact point it jumps to? Not sure if it'd be easy fix, someone that worked with Hugo should answer. But one way is to add e.g. `<sup>` with id before reference, add offset with the same size as header and create links to it. E.g.:

```html
<sup id="fnref:1" class="offset_reference"></sup>
<sup>...</sup>
```

I just created new `<sup>` before original one and moved `fnref:1` id.

and CSS:

```css
.offset_reference {
    position: relative;
    top: -75px;
}

This issue looks similar: <https://github.com/gohugoio/hugo/issues/6711>

Reviewer: @m-iwanicki, this is precisely what I was talking about. I would appreciate it if you could add that information to the README, so future authors could use our knowledge and not reinvent the wheel.

In the case of cache timing attacks, the attacker manipulates the cache (either
directly through available instructions or indirectly by exploiting how the
cache works) and measures timing of: memory access, different cache operations,
program execution time or similar.

Most of these attacks differ in their granularity. The most precise attacks can
determine exactly which block or line was accessed, less precise can only
determine which cache set was used.

### Attack types

Below is description of 3 different attack types which I tried to implement:

* `Flush+Reload` - appears to be one of the simpler attacks. It consists of 2
  parts:
  * Flush: evicting shared address from the cache
  * Reload: measuring evicted memory access time

  If the timing measurement indicates a cache hit, it means that someone
  accessed the given address between Flush and Reload. To improve detection
  (and reduce false negatives), a short wait is often added between Flush and
  Reload. This attack allows information to be obtained with cache line
  granularity.

  The image below[^flush+reload] illustrates the basic mechanism of this
  attack:

>   ![Flush+Reload timing](/img/flush_reload_timing.png)

Reviewer: The description under the picture is not good, it has formatting issues (much bigger font), and I don't think it is needed because it does not add much value. I would appreciate it if you would adjust the cutting.

  not.

  The attack is just as simple as Flush+Reload, but (un)fortunately,
  real-world operating system environments make this type of attack harder to
  execute successfully. Each time program is run may result in significantly
  different execution time due to other background processes, the system
  scheduler, etc. These differences are usually much greater than a time it
  takes to access memory from RAM, making practical attacks difficult. The
  best results can be achieved when the program has time-deterministic
  behavior. This attack allows information to be retrieved with block-level
  accuracy.

* `Prime+Probe` - Unlike the previous attacks, this one can be carried out on
  any memory, not only shared. However, the attack is much more complex to
  execute, requiring knowledge of the architecture being attacked and the
  cache indexing method. The attack involves 2 steps:
  * Prime: Fill cache lines with your own data
  * Probe: Check each set to see whether your data has been evicted (by
    measuring access time). If your data was evicted, you know someone
    accessed an address that maps to that set.

>   The biggest challenge with this type of attack is mapping addresses to cache

Reviewer: Did you mean it to be indented?

Author: Yes, it's referring to `Prime+Probe` point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The biggest challenge with `Prime+Probe` type of attack is mapping addresses to cache
```

  sets. The attacker must also know which addresses are used by the victim
  process, although deeper analysis of the program’s structure may allow this
  requirement to be bypassed. This attack has lower accuracy than the previous
  ones, it allows information to be obtained with cache set granularity.

## Tests

Tests were meant to be as simple as possible. They don't have to have practical
uses but only have to confirm whether we can get access to some information by
using cache accesses. I had most success with `Flush+Reload` attack. It's made

> of 3 parts:

Reviewer: I would phrase it differently to avoid sounding ignorant. Let's say our goal is to confirm whether we can access some information.

If you feel the other part adds value, please let me know how.

Author: 5f3bb920f94dba28758cfa9b7b508a267d3c0feb

* shared library - provides a function whose sole purpose is to access specific
  elements of a global array (which will reside in shared memory). These
  elements are 8 bytes in size, meaning that for this type of attack, we can
  obtain information with an accuracy of up to 8 indices (with cache line size
  being 64 bytes). The function returns XORed elements to prevent the compiler

>   from optimizing away the operation due to lack of side effects.

Reviewer: I guess just disabling compiler optimization would not help?

Reviewer: Ok, mention those alternatives and let the reader know why you chose XOR as ant-optimization obfuscation instead of the other.

Author: f7827d94550c

to identify the indices that the second program accessed. The start of the array
is at cache line with offset +9. From the collected data, we can easily extract
index ranges: `<0–8)`, `<8–16)`, `<32–40)`. In this case, the test also detected
access to the indices in `<16–24)` range (about half as often), and singular
accesses to couple other which we did not use.

The exact cause is unknown, but I suspect it's due to architectural
optimizations (the processor noticed that we accessed address `+0x40` and
`+0x80`, and assumed we might also want to access address `+0xc0`).

In the case of `Evict+Time`, I managed to get satisfactory results, but only
when I used the shared function directly. In such a case, the difference in
execution time was `<-7, 28>` units when evicting unused addresses, and around
`<300, 400>` units when evicting addresses used by the function.

```c
size_t indices[] = {0};
libflush_flush(libflush_session, addr);
libflush_memory_barrier();
uint64_t time = libflush_get_timing(libflush_session);
libflush_memory_barrier();
access_array(1, indices);
libflush_memory_barrier();
time = libflush_get_timing(libflush_session) - time;
```

> I am still working on `Prime+Probe` example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Prime+Probe` example is a work in progress.
```

Author: 5f3bb920f94dba28758cfa9b7b508a267d3c0feb

## Target testing platform

The main goal of these tests will be verifying whether the cache coloring
implementation in the [CROSSCON](https://github.com/crosscon) hypervisor

> prevents inter-VM cache attacks.

Reviewer: Cool, I need that in the introduction and abstract. The goal is to give a sneak peek trailer of what we are trying to achieve and what can be expected in the article.

> ![CROSSCON cache coloring](/img/crosscon-cache-coloring.png)

Reviewer: Who is the author of this and other graphics not referenced?

Author: CROSSCON graphics: taken from `D2.3 CROSSCON Open Specification`.
The virtual memory one: me

Added references to crosscon: 5f3bb920f94dba28758cfa9b7b508a267d3c0feb

Tests mentioned in previous sections were done on a normal OS without
hypervisor, and they can't be used as is and will need to be modified as we
won't be able to use shared library in this case.

The initial test implementations (without using `libflush`) did not yield
satisfactory results.
The test consisted of two VMs: one with the Client Application running on Linux
and the other with the Trusted Application.

![TA and CA VM on CROSSCON](/img/ta-ca-vm.png)

Communication between the VMs is carried out through shared memory. The CA
allocated shared memory and passed it to the TA, whose sole purpose was to
access this memory. The test results showed that:

* a custom implementation of cache operations (manipulation, timing
  measurements) is not simple, was much slower than the existing one
  (`libflush`), and suffered from “optimization” issues which resulted in not
  detecting any accesses to shared memory.
* `Evict+Time` was not feasible in its current form. I measured the execution
  time of the `TEEC_InvokeCommand` function which, but unfortunately, the timing
  varied quite significantly (even by several microseconds). Cache eviction

>   would cause a difference of, at most, a few dozen nanoseconds.

Reviewer: Ok, so we didn't prove anything, but what is our plan? I thought we would eventually prove something valuable to the reader.

Reviewer: > > but what is our plan
> 
> Should I describe possible changes I could make to CROSSCON tests?

What directions we get from the project regarding security testing in area of cache and proving cache coloring?

@macpijan can you help me here?

> 
> > I thought we would eventually prove something valuable to the reader.
> 
> What do you want me to prove?

I would answer with quote.

> The main goal of these tests will be verifying whether the cache coloring
implementation in the [CROSSCON](https://github.com/crosscon) hypervisor
prevents inter-VM cache attacks[^crosscon-spec].

Author: Yes, and, as you know, they currently don't do that. I described current state.

Reviewer: Don't we plan to address that soon?

Author: https://github.com/3mdeb/news-and-ideas/pull/649/commits/1f27893911bc60e7335714caf86ebe8b92c38779

Reviewer: @m-iwanicki, it looks like nice progress, but we do not have any conclusion. Even if we would like to close at this stage, we should probably announce another blog post and mention that results or more progress will be announced during the Zarhud Developers Meetup.

Author: Does this work? fe43c83f9cde40dabd19bd37c3e7148006724fac

  varied quite significantly (even by several microseconds). Cache eviction
  would cause a difference of, at most, a few dozen nanoseconds.

## Second try

This time I changed my approach and decided to use 2 Linux VMs and `libflush`
library. Communication between VMs is done with the help of Linux `ipcshmem`
driver

```c
crosscon-ipc@8000000 {
  compatible = "crossconhyp,ipcshmem";
  (...)
};
```

This driver creates `/dev/crossconhypipc<ID>` file which can be written to, read
from or memory mapped. As of now I have implemented `Evict+Time` test. Test flow
can be summarized as

* open and `mmap` `/dev/crossconhypipc<ID>`
* first VM (victim) - calculate median time it takes for function that accesses
  shared memory to finish and then repeat it indefinitely and report any
  differences from median. For simplicity’s sake I decided to implement timing
  inside victim program itself.
* second VM (attacker) - continuously evict requested cache line

Without cache coloring there should be noticeable jump in first VM reported time
difference when evicting used cache lines (and no difference when evicting other
non-used shared memory)

> * While evicting unused shared memory there is no change from baseline

Reviewer: @m-iwanicki I don't see a better way than what you're linking to, you can always try.
